% NOTE: This list autogenerated by `CVLError.kt`;
% DO NOT EDIT

List of CVL errors
==================

```{contents}
```


## Basic syntax errors


### `ArraySizeMustBeLiteral`

>
> Static array sizes must be number literals, such as `0` or `10`.  More complex expressions are not allowed.
>
> *No example provided*


### `CVLTypeHasLocation`

>
> Locations are only allowed in contexts that refer to Solidity types directly, such as methods block entry arguments, methods block return types, and hook arguments.  See {ref}`type-conversions` for additional information.
>
> *No example provided*


### `InvalidCatchAllFlag`

>
> The annotations that follow the `returns` clause in a methods-block entry (such as {ref}`optional` and
> {ref}`envfree`) only make sense for specific contract functions.  Therefore, their use in catch-all
> summaries of the form `function C._` are disallowed.  If you really want to declare every function `envfree`,
> you will need to add a separate entry for each function.
>
> Example:
> ```{code-block} cvl
> :emphasize-lines: 2-2
> 
> methods {
>     function C._ envfree => NONDET;
> }
> ```
> ```
> Example:3:26: Catch-all methods entries of the form `function f._` cannot be marked `envfree`
> ```


### `LhsIsDynamicArray`

>
> CVL does not support assigning to an entire array; you can only assign to an entry with a specific index.
>
> Example:
> ```{code-block} cvl
> :emphasize-lines: 2-2
> 
> rule example {
>     x[] = 2;
> }
> ```
> ```
> Example:3:17: Assigning to an array element requires an index
> ```


### `LhsIsMapping`

>
> CVL does not support assigning to an entire mapping; you must give individual assignments for the needed elements.
>
> *No example provided*


### `ReservedKeywordAsFunction`

>
> This error indicates that you tried to use a cast where a function call was expected.  If you want to call a
> contract function with the same name as a keyword, you will need to add a harness function to your contract with
> a different name.
>
> Example:
> ```{code-block} cvl
> :emphasize-lines: 2-2
> 
> rule example {
>     uint result = assert_uint256();
> }
> ```
> ```
> Example:3:27: `assert_uint256` is a reserved CVL keyword. Usage: `assert_uint256(valToConvert)`
> ```


### `SyntaxError`

>
> A syntax error indicates a misplaced symbol that prevents the CVL compiler from interpreting a spec file.
>
> Example:
> ```{code-block} cvl
> :emphasize-lines: 1-1
> 
> rule example oopsie { }
> ```
> ```
> Example:2:22: Syntax error: unexpected token near `oopsie`
> ```


### `TwoStateOnNonGhostFunction`

>
> You can only use `f@old` or `f@new` in the context of a `havoc...assuming` statement, and it can only be applied to a ghost.  See {ref}`havoc-stmt` for more information.
>
> Example:
> ```{code-block} cvl
> :emphasize-lines: 5-5
> 
> function f(uint x) returns uint {
>     return x;
> }
> rule example {
>     uint y = f@old(0);
> }
> ```
> ```
> Example:6:22: Cannot use `@old` with non-ghost function `f`
> ```



## Type-checking errors



## Methods-block errors



## CVL 2 errors


### `CVL2MissingFunctionKW`

>
> Since CVL 2, methods block entries must begin with `function`.  See {ref}`cvl2-function-keyword`.
>
> Example:
> ```{code-block} cvl
> :emphasize-lines: 2-2
> 
> methods {
>     balanceOf(address);
> }
> ```
> ```
> Example:3:17: Since CVL 2, methods block entries must begin with `function`
> ```


### `CVL2MissingSemicolon`

>
> Indicates one of the places that CVL became more strict about the placement of semicolons.  See {ref}`cvl2-semicolons`.
>
> Example:
> ```{code-block} cvl
> :emphasize-lines: 2-2
> 
> methods {
>     function balanceOf(address)
> }
> ```
> ```
> Example:3:40: Since CVL 2, methods block entries must end with `;`
> ```



## Unsupported feature errors



